\chapter{Introduction\label{cha:introduction}}


I sometimes think it is unfortunate that the modern mathematics of
20${}^{\text{th}}$ century came before modern computers. Perhaps it is
true that computers would have never been invented without Hilbert's
putting a decision problem on his list, G\"odel's unbelievable
exercise in programming with numbers, the discovery of recursive
functions, the $\lambda$-calculus, and Turing's machines, but by the
time computers ruled the world, generations of mathematicians had been
educated with little regard to questions about computability of
mathematical structures. They were told their world was a paradise and
were encouraged to take pride in the uselessness of their activity.
Today classical mathematics is taken for granted by the vast majority
of mathematicians, despite overwhelming evidence that we have entered
an era of computable---and therefore non-classical---mathematics.

How does a classically trained mathematician approach computability of
real numbers and other structures in mathematical analysis? He
probably imagines that the real numbers, and probably most
mathematics, predate computers by at least a couple of centuries. It
is then only natural for him to ``bolt on computability as an
afterthought'', as a friend of mine once put it. Indeed, this is how
computable mathematics is practiced by most experts, and the present
text is no exception. However, after introducing the basic models of
computability and the theory of representations, we choose not to
develop computable analysis directly in terms of representations.
Instead we take a general look at the setup from the viewpoint of
realizability theory, through which the connection with constructive
mathematics emerges. Only so armed with heavy machinery do we turn
attention to computable mathematics, which turns out to be just
ordinary, albeit constructive, mathematics developed in mathematical
universes that have computability built in from their conception. In
the final chapter we put on programmer's hat and actually implement
some of the computable structures in a real-world programming
language.

These lecture notes were prepared for a graduate course at the Faculty
of Mathematics and Physics, University of Ljubljana, Slovenia. I have
included more material than I could hope to cover in 15 lectures,
90~minutes each. I am aware that proper understanding of the subject
requires background knowledge in computability theory, analysis,
topology, logic, category theory, and programming. Therefore, the
first exercise for the vigilant students is to look up the meaning of
the Japanese word \emph{shugyo}.


\bigskip

\begin{flushright}
Andrej Bauer\\
Ljubljana, January 2009
\end{flushright}


%%% Local Variables: 
%%% mode: latex
%%% TeX-master: "notes"
%%% End: 
